This repository contains data and software used in the manuscript ["A machine learning method for distinguishing detrital zircon provenance based on trace element "] submitted to Journal Geophysical Research-Solid Earth on 17th Sep, 2022, by Yang Liu, Shihua Zhong, Sanzhong Li, Ilya Bindeman, Peter A. Cawood, Reimar Seltmann, Jinghui Niu, Guanghui Guo, Jiaqing Liu. All software by the authors is released under an [MIT open-source license] (LICENSE)

CONTENTS:

[Data]: This directory contains three independent datasets. These three datasets include 109 I-type zircon analyses, 69 S-type analyses, and 128 A-type analyses. For each zircon analyses, 19 variables—including 11 REEs (Ce, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, and Lu), Nb, Ta, Th, U and 4 derived trace element ratios (Th/U, U/Yb, Ce/Ce* and Eu/Eu*)—were provided in a txt and csv format. The reference sources of all these data can be found in online Supplementary Material (Tables S4 to S6) of this paper.

[Software]: This directory contains a software in exe format and a data in text format. The data includes three trained models (Support Vector Machine, Random Forest and Multilayer Perceptron) and training dataset.

INSTALLATION:

To make our trained ML algorithms easily used, three trained models are packaged as an installation-free .exe file, named Zircon Classifier, that can run in Windows platforms. Control panel interfaces consist of one main interface. This software switches the interface according to the data processing flow including choosing the file, choosing the model, and automatic prediction. The user can perform a simple assembly line operation to predict zircon provenance by simply clicking the appropriate button. If users have any questions, users can contact us via the email address (zhongshihua@ouc.edu.cn) on the main interface.
The user double-clicks the .exe file to directly enter the main interface. Then, users can click the “Enter” button on the main interface to access the Choose File interface, which is the first step. This interface allows users to view the data files to be predicted. The user may view and select the input file (i.e., .txt files, .csv files) by clicking the “Open” button. Feature elements in the input file must be in the following order: Ce, Eu, Ho, Nb, Ta, Th/U, U/Yb, Ce/Ce*, and Eu/Eu*, and, to avoid calculation errors. After the selection of the input file, the raw input data will be displayed in the table for the users to view by clicking the “Submit” button. After completing the file input, click the “Next” button to enter the Choose Model interface.
The Choose Model interface offers three available machine learning models, corresponding to the “Support Vector Machine” button, the “Random Forest” button, and the “Multilayer Perceptron” button. The principles of the implementation of the relevant model are described below each button. Users can click the button of their desired model to automatically access the Automatic Prediction interface.
The Automatic Prediction interface can make predictions on the input data, and display classification and statistical results. Users can automatically predict the raw data by clicking the “Predict” button. At the same time, the probability of each type and the final predicted result are displayed in the table. To help users better understand the classification results, users can click the “Statistics” button to count the classification results and calculate the percentage of each category. Finally, the classification results can be exported to a .txt file or a .csv file. If the user wants to make predictions for other data, he can click the Back button to go to the main screen and repeat the above operation.
